In this video we'll learn the basic syntax for declaring a class in C++.
The syntax is very simple.
First we use the reserve key word class followed by the name of the class we're declaring.
Notice that it's best practice to capitalize class names for our user defined classes.
Then we have a block which are open and closed curly braces and the class declaration is terminated
with a semi-colon in body of the class declaration.
We can supply the declarations that define the structure and behavior of our class.
Let's see an example here where declaring a class named player as we might have in a game application.
Notice the class keyword followed by the name of the class.
In this case player dead in the body of the class we can define the classes attributes or instance variables
and methods.
In this case the class has a string named name and two integers representing the players health and
Expwy.
Since C++ supports encapsulation that means we can also provide methods or functions in the class body
that are specific to the player class.
In this case we have two methods talk which expects a standard string and is dead which returns a boolean
number.
We've created the class.
We can create objects that are instances of that class.
So in this example in creating Franken hero which our player objects.
Notice the syntax.
It should feel familiar since it's the same way we create primitive types.
We can also create pointers to objects in the last example.
I'm declaring enemy as a pointer to a player object and I'm creating that object dynamically on the
heap using you when I'm finished using any object it storage has to be freed up using delete.
Here's another example where we declare an account class.
Notice that accounts have a name which is a standard string and a balance which is a double.
And in this example we have a withdraw method that expects the amount to withdraw and returns a boolean
indicating success.
We also have a deposit method that expects the amount to deposit and also returns a boolean indicating
success.
We'll talk more about how we define class methods in a few videos.
But notice how they're basically function prototypes in these examples.
Now that we've declared the account class we can create objects of that type.
So Frank's account in Jim's account or objects or instances of the Account class in the last declaration
Mary's account is a pointer to an account object that again has been allocated dynamically on the heap
and then freed up when we're done with it.
Once we have objects we can use them like any other variable in C++ for example we can create an array
of account objects and initialize the array to Frank's account and Jim's account.
We can create a standard vector of account objects and initialize it to Frank's account and then push
back Jim's account.
You can see how easy and how readable our code looks.
We're using our own user defined types and we're using them intuitively like we've used other C++ types.
In the next video we'll see the syntax for accessing the attributes and methods and objects.
But first let's head over to the IEEE and create these classes.
Ok so I mean the idea I mean the section 13 workspace the declared class and objects project.
This is just an empty little project right now with an empty Main.
I've included IO stream string and vector and I'm using namespace standard.
Remember you really don't want to use namespace standard all the time you really want to be explicit
and type out you know Studd scope resolution operator and whatever you need.
So I'm going to do it because it'll save me a lot of typing time otherwise these videos could be of
pretty long with me making typos.
So what do I want to do here.
Let's create the player class the account class and we'll create some objects.
The first question is Where do we create the player class let's do the player class first.
I could do it right inside main.
I could say.
Class player and define that class right in here.
That's really not what I want to do because if I do that then I'm defining that class inside the scope
of Main which means that only main will have access to access to that class and that's not really what
I want I want to create my player class so that the entire application has access to it.
So I'm going to do it right up here and then later on in this section we'll learn how to do it an even
better way we'll use separate files to do it.
But for now let's learned about classes and objects.
So what I want to do is I want to say class player.
Remember that class name should be in uppercase and you need a semi-colon right here at the end of the
class declaration.
So what do we put inside this class declaration what we saw in the slides.
You can put attributes in here.
That's typically data and we can put methods in here which are operations or functions.
That's when the cancellation is all about putting all these things together.
Now what do you do.
What do you put in here.
Well it depends depends on what a player is in the context of your application.
You could have all kinds of stuff in here or could have a minimal amount of stuff in here.
That's the whole point.
You really don't want to model a player that could be used in any application in the world.
You just want to model a player that's going to be used in your application that you can extend easily.
OK.
So don't try to model that the best player object to class you could ever have just solve your problem.
So in this case let's assume that a player has a or a name which is a string and the player has an integer
which is their health and say something like between 0 and 100 0 health you're dead and XP which is
experience.
And that could be three up to whatever.
It doesn't really matter.
It's all based on our application.
So now what we're seeing here is that the class player is going to be a blueprint to create player objects
from an every player object is going to have a string that represents surname name two integers one
representing the health one representing their XP.
Now what methods can we have.
We can have a ton of methods let's just create two of them really simply say you understand how this
works what you do here is you basically do everything we learned when we talked about functions.
So I want to have a method called Talk and it expects a string.
So whatever string you pass into the player the player will talk it right back out and let's say we
want to have is dead.
This is a method that returns to a fault based on whether the player is dead and the player might be
dead if their health is zero or whatever other criteria we have for that.
Again notice that with these look like are basically function prototypes at this point we could implement
them right here and we will in a couple of more videos.
But for analysis think these are the attributes these are the methods.
OK.
Also there's the concept of public and private but we have access to we'll get to all that really really
soon.
But that's it.
That's a minimal player class.
Given this I can create player objects.
Now let's create 2 player objects right here in main.
I'll say player Frank and player hero.
That's it.
When these two ends execute will the system will create two player objects one is called Frank.
One is called Hero.
Each one of them has a name.
Health and XP.
Each one of them can call these methods and talk and ask if it's dead or not.
OK.
So hopefully that makes sense.
Let's run this right now.
We're going to run this in the debugger so you can see them what I'm going to do is I'm going to.
For someone to save this then I'm going to click right here in the gutter and you get that little stop
sign for the debugger and then when I'm going to do is just get a debugger start the bugger or you just
press F5.
And I've got my debugger set up so that my local variables over here and he watches and I want to look
for here.
And then the call stack is here the call stack is real simple we're just in Maine right now.
You can see I've got my two local variables.
You can see them displayed right up here.
I've got Frank and I've got a hero right now.
They don't really exist because I haven't created them yet yet but they're in the local variables paying
here.
So what I want to do is let's create Frank in here just hit the next arrow down here.
And Frank is now active and then hero is now active.
And if you expand these guys a little bit you can see something of what's going on here.
You can see Frank has a name right of course.
Here it is.
It's one of the attributes Frank has health and Frank has XP.
Notice it's garbage data right.
The only reason that the string is not garbage is because our C++ string class are standard string class
has a default initialiser which initializes it to empty which is pretty cool.
But the rest of the stuff is junk just garbage data the same thing with health and the same thing with
XP.
This is the same sort of behavior we saw when we created regular variables.
OK.
So we'll talk about initializing these objects in a couple of videos where we use constructors to do
it.
And that makes things much much easier.
Ok so I'm going to stop this debugger and we can also create objects on the heap just like we could
regular primitive types.
So in this case I'm going to say player
enemy is a pointer to a player member you read this from right to left.
And you know what.
Let's set it to null pointer of the this two steps just so you can see this happening in the debugger.
Then I'm going to say enemy equals new player.
That's going to create the enemy on the heap that enemy object which is a player.
And then I'm just going to say delete and when I'm done.
OK so let me move that right to about there and let's run this again in the debugger here you can see
that right now there's garbage data in the value for enemy right.
So it exists.
It's a pointer it's got a value and it's junk right now.
So when I execute the statement I just nailed it out and you can see it's zero.
That's the safe way to do things.
Now I want to create this new player object on the heap.
So right now when I execute that statement you expect that address to change right.
Because obviously I'm creating this on the heap and I'm storing the address of that object in enemy
which is a pointer.
So that's step through it.
Here we go.
At this point that enemy object is created it's on the heap.
It's a player.
Right.
That's its type.
And if I expand as you can see that the game is empty but Helfand XP contain garbage just what we would
expect.
And then when we're done with it we can delete it.
OK.
Really really straightforward.
Let me add a few lines of code right in here and we'll get rid of that breakpoint will move it in a
second.
Once we have these objects we can treat them like any variables just like we've worked with integers
and doubles and everything else.
So in this case.
So I want to create an array right here called players
and it's a an array.
And I want to set it to Frank and here Mike just like we've done with integers.
It's the same idea.
So let's read this together here says players is an array of player objects.
Well I've got two of them right here so I can initialize that array to Frank and hero.
I'm going to save this.
And let's put a breakpoint right there so we can look at it and we'll run
OK so you can see players right here and I'm going to step through it.
Up players been initialized here to those two objects.
The first object and the second object the first object is Frank.
The second object is zero.
And you can tell we don't have any strings for names now but you can tell from the garbage values that
they really are indeed those objects.
So it's really as simple as that.
This is very powerful stuff because we can create our own user defined types which is what player is
and then use it just like we can use any other variable.
OK.
So last thing is let's try to create rather than an array here let's do a vector.
So let's create a vector a vector of what what we've done vectors of teenagers the vectors of strings
go one on a vector of player.
OK and we'll just call it player back.
So again what is this.
This is a collection of player objects.
OK so let's initialize this to Frank.
That's a player object.
And then what we could do is we can ask the player Veck to push back and push back as a method in the
Vector class and we can push back here.
Right so let's execute both these lines and I'll get to put a put a breakpoint right there and we'll
go back to the debugger and run this.
So right now we have player Veck somewhat step into it here so that I can create that vector.
OK the vectors now created it's called Player Veck It's right here.
If I expand it you can see that right now there's one item in there and that one item is Frank if you
look at Frank appear you could see it's garbage data right here.
Well it's going to be the same garbage data right here because we just copied that object OK.
Now when I execute the next line which I'm going to just by clicking next here that should add hero
to that vector.
So let's do that.
And now you can see you notice here that it didn't really show up here.
This player VUK which you can do when that happens is you need to refresh right here.
So when I refresh the right now that says there's only one item in there we know there are two.
So if you refresh and then expand player VEC There you go and you see both items.
In this case that's Frank.
And in this case that's hero OK.
So all this works exactly like it did with integers and doubles and so forth.
All right so let's create an account class.
Now real quick we'll do it right below the player class will create a class account and will create
the body and we'll put a semi-colon on the end.
Don't forget that semi-colon if you forget that semi-colon you're going to get compiler errors and they're
going to be strange compiler error because the compiler is going to be lost trying to figure out where
you are.
OK so here we can have attributes
and what we'll say here is again we've got a string name the name of an account and we've got a double
which is called balance.
Then here we can have methods again as many methods as we want.
Now you'll notice it over here.
I just prototype those two methods I just declared.
Am I never defined them.
So how in the world did this work well this work.
Because I never called them if I had called those methods I'd have a linker error because the linkers
going to say I don't know where those things are you told me there were there but I don't know where
they are.
OK will implement all this stuff in the next few videos.
So let's create a couple of methods bhool deposit and double and bhool withdraw double.
Those are my two method declarations.
I want to deposit some amount in I want to return TRUE FALSE whether it was successful or not.
And with that withdraw some amount.
Again it's a double.
And I want to return true or false depending on whether it was successful.
And once that I I've that once I've got that class declared I can now create a count object so I could
save Frank the count
I could say Jim account and so forth can now put up a break right here.
And let's check that out in the debugger.
You could see right here is Frank account.
So I'm going to go next and next.
Again that's created those two objects.
So here Frank account has a name.
It's empty and it's got a garbage number for balance and the same thing for Jim's account.
It's got a name and it's got a balance.
OK.
Now something that's useful in C++ 11 and going forward is that you can actually initialize these guys
right here.
So let's just say that I wanted to initialize that to Frank to account accounts sorry.
And I wanted to initialize balance to zero.
I can do that and I can also do this up here.
So let's say I wanted to initialize this to the player.
When you think about this it's really odd that they're letting you do this at all because we're an issue
we're creating these initialization of variables here.
But we don't even have objects yet.
Right I mean this is just a class declaration we have we don't have any objects but they can come in
handy and I'll show you how to initialize these things using constructors and initializer lists and
a little while.
But let's say that XP is three and the health is 100
Kate.
So let let's run this again this time and I'll stop the debugger and started again.
Forgot my semi-colon.
I probably forgot some down here as well.
So let's let's run them.
OK so now you can see me scroll up a little bit and read here on 9:33.
So I'm going to go next next.
I've just created those two accounts and again I'm going to go next next and I just created those two
players Frank and hero.
But now when I look at Frank you can see Frank's name as player it's health is 100 it's XP is three.
So basically any object is going to get these values right here.
And as I said we'll learn other ways to initialize.
But this is pretty nice right now because we can actually see them in the debugger and you can see this
working OK.
And the same thing with the count frank account here says account with a balance of zero 0 and Jim's
account is account with a balance of zero as well.
OK.
All right.
Perfect.
Now in the next video what we'll learn to do is learn how to actually access those class attributes
in class methods using an object.
OK.
So I see in a little bit.